Maryam: You’ve just completed another year of neuroscience research dialogue classes. How does it feel to conclude each year?  Do you enjoy holding this class? 

Ian: Do I enjoy teaching grad students? I love it! Grad students are great.  Who wouldn't like it? They're young and they're smart. They're ambitious. Yeah, they're OK to hang out with! 

Maryam: What do you think is the essence behind this course? In the university course catalog, it is described as follows: “a seminar-based course focusing on research questions and conventions across disciplines, humanities, science, and social science in Neuroscience. Emphasis is placed on creating productive research dialogues within and between students, faculty, and diverse disciplinary approaches to the field”. Before I came here, I knew this was a mandatory course for graduate student, but I couldn't understand what it meant.

Ian: Yeah you couldn’t. Well, there are two kinds of seminar people have. One are kind of journal club seminars where students go in and present a paper and then other people ask questions. In my experience, they’re terrible. The student presentations on the papers are bad because they don't know enough to analyze the paper, and the papers are probably not of a lot of interest to the other people in the class. I think that journal clubs are great for labs because everybody's got a common interest in something in that paper, but they're just terrible for interlab communications. And so I kind of think of what skills do a grad students need to have? And I think one of the most important skills is, you have to be able to interact with other people, and you don't know this yet. The students I went to school with, I was still publishing with them 42 years later, and contacting them! You form those relationships when you're young and so, you want to encourage that. In a lot of places that I've been the labs are little empires and they even don't talk to each other because there's jealousy and animosity, and the kids think we're the best and so on. I think that's a bad atmosphere, and by taking the students out of that and putting them in a in a room where they're together, they become more of us and the the labs become kind of the whole. So that's one idea behind it. I think the personal contacts are important. I also think there's some skills that you need, to do anything in life, not just be a scientist, and one of them is to be able to speak and be kind of comfortable, and you're not born with that ability. The only way you can do it is get lots and lots of practice. Once upon a time, all the scientific conferences, students had to give a talk and so they would practice their talks and go to scientific conferences. Now it's all posters, so you never get to give a talk.You might give a presentation in your lab seminar, but you don't get to give a talk to anybody else. So I thought, well, the seminar could do that. The idea is to have people talk almost every class about their most interesting thing, which is themselves and their thesis, and if you possibly can, it just has so many facets, right? If you understand the problem you're working on, you can apply for a grant. You can write a paper. You can design a new experiment. You can collaborate with somebody else. You can do all of those things. 

Maryam: Who designed the course in the first place? This is the only mandatory course for PhD students 

Ian: I designed it 

Maryam: How long ago? 

Ian: They always had a journal club kind of course, and the students hated it, and eventually, no one in the faculty wanted to teach it anymore. So they wanted me to take it over and I said, well, OK, these are my demands, I demand to get rid of the grades, make it pass-fail, and it's compulsory. Every student is in the course for the entire time they're in grad studies, except their last year. And the department didn't like that at all. So it took two or three years and finally they just couldn't get anyone to teach it, so they came to me and said, ok, would you teach it? And I said, well, ok. I have been teaching two courses, I taught an undergraduate seminar and a second year brain and behavior course. I said if I do this then I don't do that anymore. So I traded my two courses essentially and somebody wanted to teach the brain and behavior in new faculty member. So that was a good two way deal. 

Maryam: So you stopped teaching brain and behavior when you started teaching the seminar course? 

Ian: Yeah, I dropped it. That was a good course, I liked it. It had 300 students in it. The room was packed and every day it was showtime. I didn't ask the kids to learn anything. I just said, “Come and learn about neurosciences and that brought a lot of kids into neurosciences.” They thought the brain was really interesting. 

Maryam:  I've actually heard about your brain and behavior course. Students really enjoyed it. So, it would be around 7-8 years since you started teaching the seminar course, right? 

Ian: How long has it been, well, at least 10 years. 

Maryam: Have you made any changes to the course outline or your teaching style? 

Ian: Every year I get a new idea. The last time I started coming up with the one minute talks. Now I've got the idea of the mandatory questions, even when somebody comes in, you have to speak up to ask the question. I used to have more guest speakers. Don't tell him this, but Kolb had a hard time getting a job and he has got a big pile of rejection letters, which he likes to show everybody. So I thought when we do the job prospects for students, you can come and give a talk. But he was terrible. They weren't interested in what he had to say so so that didn't work very well.  

Maryam: You sometimes take notes when students are presenting. I've always been curious about what your takeaways are.

Ian: I usually write down one word and I'm trying to think when a student gives a talk, anything I can remember from that talk, and usually I don't remember anything. after the class was over, I couldn't tell you. I couldn't even tell you right now what you work on after listening to you all year. I think that's largely to do with you have to learn to make a presentation so other people remember what you are doing. There's just so much stuff now, right, you read ten articles you read this, you read that you work with the student and you work with that student all, and so you learn not to remember anything. It's kind of like having a big class. You don't try to learn their names. And so yeah, I'm looking I'm always looking for the student gives the talk and I remember that talk and and then I know they kind of got it. 

Maryam: Does that happen? 

Ian: It's surprising how little I see of that.  If you go and listen to the masters and PhD students, their slides are full of colour and full of figures and they don't explain any of the figures. But once in a while you see student, he comes up and he listened, and the slide is simple, and he explains the slide. And you say, OK. I mean it's it's not that you don't learn in that class, science is a lifelong learning process, right? But you know, the idea, at least, of having a simple slide and you don't want to give up having lots of colour and lots of stuff on your slide because you think you know you can hide behind it. But if you stay in science eventually you begin to realize you know, I got to go back to the simple slide stuff. And so when we have speakers that are good speakers that come in, you notice there's slides are pretty simple. There's one idea on the slide kind of thing. 

Maryam: Why do you think so many of us were stressed about giving our talks? I was wondering if it might be because English is our second language, which makes us a bit nervous. However, I've also heard from Canadian colleagues that they were also very stressed about giving talks. Why do you think that is? This seems to affect the quality of presentations. 

Ian: Well, I think It's kind of good to to be nervous. It's telling you to be prepared. And I'm still nervous when I give a talk, especially when I give a talk to another university and I'll start preparing that talk three or four months before and you know every couple of weeks I'll go through the slides. This is what I want to say to that audience. So yeah, and it's really I'm nervous for two or three months before I go and give that talk right. So I think everybody is, but I think it's also important to give lots of talks because then you learn how to handle it. You know, I'm nervous, but I I can give a talk. 

Maryam: Were there any special moments or highlights from this year's class?

Ian: Well, you know, at the business competition the impression that I had after it was over is that all the students were friends and that's kind of the success of the class, right? And Hannah said that to me, too. She said ,the students are just interacting with each other. That's amazing because I don't know how many seminars you're in, but you can be in a lot of seminars and never know the people in the seminar and you leave the seminar and you don't talk to them. But you know now when you leave the seminar, you see the students talking to each other in the corridor, like they've become friends. They know each other and that's kind of really, I think, the target of it all.

Maryam: Yes, that's correct. We are friends now. In your lab, the board is often filled with meeting times. You supervise many independent students or those under the supervision of your colleagues. Have you always had this approachable attitude? What were your initial thoughts about being accessible to students at the beginning of your career? 

Ian: Well, you know, before COVID and before computers and all of that kind of stuff everybody came to work and largely came to work because they had an electric typewriter in their office, and that's where they could work. So when you came into the department, all the faculty were there. All the students were there every day, and people usually came to work, you know, eight or nine and went home 4:30 or five. When we got computers, you work at home. And then after COVID came It made it acceptable to work at home. And so now people don't see their students anymore, and the students don't see their supervisors. And so the way I deal with that is any student I'm working with, I gotta meet with them. I owe them at least one hour a week. And we can do the rest on Internet. We can do all of that kind of stuff, but we have to have some eye contact. They have to know me a little bit and I have to know them a little bit. And I think the same goes for the undergraduates. If they take an independent study course from you, if you were giving a a lecture to them, they'd hear you 3 three times a week. I think you owe at least one hour to them. Because they're taking the independent study from you. And so, I mean, they have to come and see me for at least 1 hour every week, and if they miss their letter grade goes down, right. So they become motivated to come. 

Maryam: I guess you also enjoy these kinds of collaborations, right? Many supervisors only discuss the main topics, but staying in touch with students regularly seems to work well for both of you.

Ian: Yeah, I think the students are kind of like everybody else they are in the stressful situation, and they have their problems with life and some of them have other kinds of problems, mental health problems, physical disability problems. And I think you just kind of have to know that. You know you can just say well that person will work and dismiss them, but I think you shouldn't. Like you should know If there's a problem. I think when you meet with the student there's a lot of things you can tell them about science, and why you do an experiment and what you're looking for. I don't give students projects where they have to do some work, I give them a project where they have to come back to me with an idea about how something works and and hopefully if they come back with a good idea. It'll be a paper someday. 

Maryam: Could you please tell us about some of your ongoing projects? What are the questions driving your current research, and what are you hoping to achieve.

Ian: Well, my main project is I study hand use and right now it's visual hand coordination, and the project I'm working on right now is the idea that we use vision for two kinds of things. One is for picking things up, and the other is for orienting things. So our mouth, can take them and I'm kind of arguing that those roles are separate and so that's one kind of project. But I have a lot of other hand projects I'm playing around with. I do some work with Duke university with mice and optogenetics. I'm their hand expert in in that research and then for fun, I also write papers about my horses. 

Maryam: Yes! I have seen them on Google Scholar. Can you explain more about them? 

Ian: Well, you know, you're riding around and sometimes you just have an idea.  I probably written about 10 papers on horses now, so it has been interesting. There are lots of people that ride horses. It's huge sport, there are almost as many horses in Alberta as there are people. But there aren't that many people interested in the science of hourses. So I think we need to approach horses from a scientific point of view if we're really going to understand how we use them. Well, horses like to sniff dung. And you know, if you let them, they'll sniff every pile of dung they come across. And so you can use that as a test of memory. So you just let them sniff something and bring them back and see how long they sniff at the 2nd time. If they sniff it less then they remember, right? So you have a very simple way of studying memory. And the the latest paper I had just came out with the with a grad student from here we found that if you on the same day bring them back to this same dung their sniffing decreases, but if you bring them back the next day, it's like they have to start over again and that phenomenon is called adaptive forgetting, and there are very, very few examples of adaptive forgetting. Everybody assumes that when you learn something, it's going to show it the next day. Nobody assumes when they teach a rat something it will purposely  going to forget it for the next day as it's a matter of survival, to forget it. 

Maryam: Why It's a matter of survival? 

Ian: Well, if there's something new about the dung the next day and it's a competitor who could hurt you or fight with you, you need to know that. And you can't ever be sure. So you check everything, right?  So I've done with some friends in Illinois and also with Candice, who's in McGill ,the former student here, we we've looked at rats and mice sniffing and it's the same rule with them. Like if you put them in a box with lots of samples, they go around and they sniff them all and they tend not to go back to them. So that if you have, say, 30 different dung things in there, they might only go back to three or four and sniff at the second time. So they've got a good memory for a lot of stuff and so now we can ask the next question, do they also show it after forgetting? And you know, there are thousands of people that use the memory tests. There are thousands of papers 3000 to 4000. I think the last time I counted on that. No one is considered adaptive  forgetting everybody thinks they're studying memory, but I think they should be really studying adaptive forgetting. 

Maryam: Are there any recent findings or breakthroughs in neuroscience that have particularly excited you and you're following? 

Ian: Breakthroughs that I'm following? The things that people do are so amazing to me nowadays I couldn't even imagine. I couldn't even imagine optogenetics, if you ever told me you could put receptors into a nerve cell and then stimulated it with light, I would’nt believe that. So now you can do things like that or you know that you can label specific neurons in the brain or a specific population. So you're getting close to being able to label all the pathways out of the structure and study each one. You couldn't have imagined that being possible. Or you see through brains or making a brain bigger, like all this technology and artificial intelligence.  No one could have imagined that. So you can't imagine what's coming next, can you? Well, if you could, you'd be the leader of it.  

Maryam: So you cannot imagine what advancements may come in the future of neuroscience

Ian: Well. Behavior will never be hijacked. It will just be studying behavior, I think it's the foundation to everything. That's why I work with these guys at Duke. They're world famous or aligned with Allen Institute, they have the latest technology, but they know nothing about behavior. And so, they go out and get people like me and say, well, how does the rat reach or how does the mouse do this? So, we don't really know everything we need to know about behavior, especially human behavior, a lot of it's a mystery. We have some ideas about it, so I don't think that behavior is going to  go. 

Maryam: Have there been any topics or ideas that you were once an advocate for, but as time passed, you found them less important or irrelevant? Have you ever lost interest in or abandoned any particular areas of research? 

Ian: Yeah, well, I did my PhD studying hippocampal Theta rhythms and behavior and, in the end, I was not that interested in the brain waves. I was more interested in behavior and I kind of lost my interest in the brain waves. The hippocampus area took a turn, some people went the memory lane and other people went the spatial lane and the technology in both of them sort of began to dominate rather than the behavior, so that's kind of why I left that area and I went to reaching, and nobody, absolutely nobody studied reaching. Nobody thought rats and mice could reach. They called these things paws, not hands. In us, they call them hands and in animals they call them paws. And so that was a nice novel field to work in and now everybody calls them hands. 

Maryam: What made you pursue studying reaching? 

Ian: Well, I was interested in Parkinson's disease and at that time they just found out that you could take neonatal cells of dopamine and noradrenaline, put them in an animal brain, and they've grown and survived. We know Parkinson is due to the loss of dopamine cells, the idea was to take embryonic dopamine cells put them in the brain and restore normal function.  That was the idea. So, Andres Bjorklund, and Steve Dunnett done, it was in Cambridge. They were the big guys that were doing that, they were the first people I saw doing that. So I went and spent a year with Dunnet, and so we would produce animals that have Parkinson's disease. The question is, what were you going to study? And so I thought, well, you know, if Parkinson's Disease patients have trouble reaching, let's train them to reach. And so that's what I did there. I developed a reaching task and so we studied the Parkinson rats and then after that I kept doing more studies on reaching. I think maybe 100 by now. 

Maryam: You stopped studying Parkinson's specifically? 

Ian: Well, I was interested in the application to Parkinson's disease, but I kept it with stroke, it's a hand problem, with the autism, it can be a hand problem. There's just so many diseases that if you ask people after they've had some sort of disease what they want back, it's the use of the hands that's always first. So it seemed like the behavior was applicable to so many different problems. And you can get grant money, you can go to this stroke people, the Parkinson people, you know and and say hey,  you know give me some money to study hand use! 

Maryam: You are such a renowned scientist, holding numerous honors. what do you consider as the most honorable achievement of your career? 

Ian: What I like the most? There are lots of little things that people don't know very much about. But one idea was the food carrying idea. Actually, a guy called Michael he is at McMasters University, wanted to study hoarding in a rat and he asked me if I could suggest a good model. So I read the literature and most people just did it overnight. Rats would take the food from here and they put it there. So I got a big cage, and the rat had a nest over here and I would put some food on the other end and then it would go and get it taken home so you could actually watch him do that. One day I started dropping other things than food in, and they would take them to their cage. I dropped a little nail in, and they went and picked it up and dropped it, and they wouldn't take it. So, then I tried some other little things and if it was small they wouldn't carry it. Then I started varying the size, and I found the size they would carry. So there you could do psychophysics on what they would carry home. And then that lets you all sorts of studies about their behavior related to the size of the food. If it was a small piece of food, they would eat it where they were. If there was a big piece, they carry it home. The reason they carried it home is because they'd spend more time in safety if they carried a big piece of food home. But if they carried a a small piece of food home it wouldn't pay for the Trip. And and then lots of other things went along with it. If they took a big piece of food home, and you timed how long they came back, it was proportional to the size of the food they just eat. So if they just had a little piece of food they come back quickly, big piece of food, they come back later. If you watch them after they eat, they sniff around to see if there are any crumbs to pick up. If you measure how long they sniff or how big the pop is, it's proportional to the size of the food, so everything is proportional to the size of the food. But if you vary the food, make it hard or soft it, turns out it's not the food at all. It's the time, they keep track of time, and it's a time decision. There's a theory called optimal foraging theory where you try to optimize stuff, so if you're going to optimize you need some currency for the payoff, right? And the currency is your life. Actually, the goal is to protect your life, and the currency is time. So you measure everything in terms of time. So that importance of time was really kind of interesting. It turns out time is important for other things. If I reach for this cookie and put it in my mouth, the distance from my hand to here is much shorter than the distance from my mouth. But if you measure how long it takes to do that, this time is exactly the same as that time. It's called isochrony or equal time. So it looks like we measure our behavior, our movements in terms of time too. And I once read a a book I like, by John Holt, it was called How Children Fail. He studied children to see why they failed, And he discovered that they hurried and I think I know the reason that they hurry. The more you have to do, the more you hurry because you're trying to do things in the same amount of time and that produces fails. So you have to learn when you've got more work to do to go slow and that's hard for people to do. You know, you always say if you got a job, give it to a busy person. It's not because they're busy. It's because they know how to manage time. To make up for too much work, they don't rush. 

Maryam: Actually, in today's culture, being a workaholic is somewhat glorified. People are always busy, working on weekends, thinking that the more effort they put in, the closer they get to success. As a successful person, you don't give me the impression that you were a workaholic.

Ian: Well, I kind of enjoy what I am doing, but I think, largely from having women in my laboratory, if you treat it as a job, you do better. So the guys would come and they'd hang around and they'd be here, they come late and they come after work, but the women when they came, always seem they had other things, children maybe, family, friends, boyfriend, whatever. And I just think that by coming in in the morning and leaving at 4:30 and that's when you work, That's when you're most successful. I think it's important that people have a life, and science is just a part of that life. It's not all of that life. It's just a small part of that life. You know, 24 hours a day, four or five hours a day for science is a lot enough. 

Maryam: And you worked like this? 

Ian: I do. I get up pretty early in the morning and by 8:00 or 9:00 I've properly done my day's work, and then the rest of my day is free. But that’s since covid. Before that I used to come and work at school here. I think that's that's why a lot of people don't succeed in grad school because nowadays they don't have to get up. They don't have to come in, they come in, there's nobody here, they don't learn that job. I think I felt the same thing when I taught brain and behavior. I had 300 kids in the class, there are 30 classes during the semester and I figured OK, the 1% of your grade for every class. So they have to do something in the class they have to answer question. The attendance was nearly 100%, and the questions are easy like if you came to class, you're guaranteed to get your 1% . They have to learn to come to class, they're high school students, they have to learn that coming to the university is a job they have to do in the day. And if they don't have to come to class, they're not learning and they're also going to fail the class and they'll fail their other classes, but if they come for years, they're there anyway. They'll go to their other classes too, you know, so I'm kind of influenced by that kind of stuff. 

Maryam: if you were in graduate school today, how would you spend your time?  

Ian: If I were in grad school again today, I probably fail. 

Maryam: Why?! 

Ian: Well, when I went to grad school with Rod Cooper, Rod Cooper always came to work at 8:30, he was always there and he never left till five. So he was there from 8:30 to 5:00 and so when you worked in his lab, you kind of had the idea you should be there from. 8:30 to 5:00.  The rest of my classes, I didn't go to my classes half of the time. It took me a long time to get an undergraduate degree because, you know, I was totally irresponsible. 

Maryam: I'm glad, I can relate to that! 

Ian: Yeah, but that was kind of the first time where, you know,  if I missed a day and I didn't come to work, I'd feel really bad because he'd be there and I wouldn't be there. And he'd noticed that I wasn't there and I didn't want him to ever notice I wasn't there. And we don't have that model anymore, right. We work on a different system I think if you survive as a grad student in the world that we have now, you're gonna be good because you have to be good. You have to do everything on your own. I mean there's nobody there to help you really. 

Maryam: Reflecting on your own journey, what do you believe was primary factor contributing to your success? Was it hard work, intellect, good network? 

Ian: When I was a master student I took a course from and one of the things that they had in the course was a study on who succeeds in grad school. And it was a big issue because they were making examinations like the Miller analogy and the graduate record exam, and then if you did well on them, they they take you in grad school. So the big question was, do those tests actually measure your success in grad school? And the answer is they don't at all. The one thing that measures it is how persistent you are. It's not how smart you are. It's not anything else. It's the person who sticks to it. And I think that's really true. No matter how hard the problem is, if you keep working at it, it becomes simpler and simpler until when you're finished. You say well, that's easy or people will say to you that's easy to do but when you first start to do it, it isn't easy. You know, if you're trying to do a certain kind of surgery, it takes a lot of time and skill. Once you're good at it, it's easy. So yeah, there you go. I mean research says it’s is how persistent you are. 

Maryam: So you were a persistent person. 

Ian: I'm persistent, compulsive. I mean, I've worked on problems for years that I just couldn't solve, but they wouldn't go away. They always bothered me and then one day, I would wake up and say I think I understand it now. You know and it's just if you don't stick to it, it doesn't come. And I I think a lot of things are like that. Brian and I wrote two books and that took a lot of persistence, because when we started writing those books, we were terrible writers. We had no idea how to write a book. But now we're pretty good writers. But you know we had to learn it by doing, by writing those books. We had to learn it, and writing chapters over and over and sending them out to reviewers and getting reviewers saying this is terrible and so on and so forth. 

Maryam: So, there's no magic behind success.

Ian: Yeah, it doesn't matter how smart you are. Unless you work with the problem you're not going to solve it so you know intelligence goes out the window unless the person who works at it, and I think that's true of everything that you do in life. Like I ride horses and I compete and the only way to get good at it is to ride horses. You can take lessons, that's helpful, but to get good at it, you have to do it and do it and do it and do it.  

Maryam: Could you share a bit about your personal life? Tell us about your marriage, children, and grandchildren.

Ian: Yeah, I've been married since 50 years. I have two children, two sons. They're both in their 50s now. One of them works for Blizzard, the gaming company that's in San Diego. And the other one works for Electronic Arts. It's a gaming company in Vancouver.

Maryam: So they're both in tech. 

Ian: They don't do computing. One of them  does managing stuff, and the other one does art stuff, and the youngest one that does the art stuff in Vancouver, has 2 little kids. He married a Japanese girl and I think they're 5 and 3 so I got 2 grand kids.

Maryam: Seems nobody else in your family is very interested in neuroscience.

Ian: No, not really. No one else in my family does neuroscience. I have a sister and she's a writer, she's a very successful writer, living in Vancouver. She's written something like 11 mystery books. I've read quite a few of her books. She started writing those books kind of late in life. She was a teacher, and then a high school principal, and then she retired and started writing. She always wanted to write, but but she got involved in making a living for a long time. 

Maryam:  Are there any books that you would like to suggest, ones that you enjoy reading?  

Ian: Yeah. I always liked reading. I used to almost read a book a day. I tell people that and they wouldn't believe me. I read a lot of books. 

Maryam: Read a book a day? I can't believe it as well! Even while you were working full time? 

Ian: Yeah, even when I was a professor. You know I just sit and read books all the time. I don't very much anymore because my eyes aren't as good as they were and it's too much strain to read the small print. My favorite writer, Dostoyevsky I like it. I read crime and punishment. That was the first book I read by him and I I just loved it. So Russian authors in general I like. And English poetry, I like English poetry. 

Maryam: What about other hobbies, musical instruments, or sports? 

Ian: I played guitar for a years. As we were in university, we had a little group played folk music and after university I didn't play with the group anymore. The guys I played with went on, became professional musicians, maybe because I wasn't that good! Sports always been my hobby, it didn't matter, football, soccer, basketball, skiing, riding horses. I ride horses every day. I try not to miss a day. 

Maryam: When did you start riding horses? 

Ian: I was 60 years old. My neighbor had a horse in Fernie and he was selling a horse, and somehow he talked to me into buying a horse. So then I started riding the horse and it didn't know anything, it was terrible. And then I went to a clinic by one of these horse whisperer people, and he trained this horse to do some stuff in half an hour and I was totally amazed. The first insight I had that there was a way you could teach a horse to do things.  And then I really got involved in that. That's why I still write papers on them and and ride them every day. 

Maryam: How many horses do you have? 

Ian: I had 10 or 12, but I only have three right now. 

Maryam: Alright! Thank you so much for taking the time to chat with us!  

Ian: Ok Maryam Good Luck with all of that stuff ! Maybe you can sell that story to someone! 

